vabo thank you so much for joining us on
up
front thank you for having me Mark uh
we've seen a massive outpouring of
support uh for Palestine in your home
country of Pakistan uh since the
beginning of Israel's Siege on Gaza uh
protests in the tens of thousands have
been held in cities all around the
country with little sign of momentum
slowing uh why do you think the people
of Pakistan have been so outspoken in
their support um Pakistan has
historically always supported um
Palestinian um struggle and of course
the ending of apartheid in Palestine
it's a a relationship that goes back
really um to when both countries were
made in a sense Pakistan is born in 1947
and and Israel is created in 1948 but
Pakistan has always had a a communion
with with the Palestinian people we see
from the United States to the United
Kingdom to most of Europe and Beyond to
countries like Pakistan that their
people are
wholeheartedly in favor of a permanent
ceasefire whereas the governments are
not um we see people demanding certain
action from their governments which
their governments are just ignoring so I
don't think we've ever seen a split so
wide and I don't think that's unique to
just Pakistan um of course the Pakistani
people uh have been protesting like
people all over the world and I think
this Global movement will
continue uh on December 7th Israel
killed the renowned Palestinian writer
academic and activist
rat uh as well as six of his family
members uh over the past three months
Israel has killed more than 18,000 Gins
wiping out entire families in fact
wiping out entire Bloodlines uh and yet
elad's killing specifically uh has
elicited an outcry can you explain to us
uh who he was and why his death is being
felt so so
powerfully um in the last two months
Israel has killed 89 journalists I
believe the number stands at um they've
killed over a 100 un um relief Works
agency staff um they have killed um
Palestinian Medics and health workers in
the hundreds um and they have also
killed writers artists
musicians children newborns all these
deaths have been painful to watch but
rat was a voice of the horror that was
unfolding so many of us were following
the air strikes the daily struggle to
get food the power cuts the internet
cuts through rat's uh tweets through his
Instagram stories and his his will to
survive his poetry he's talking about
the impact of literature the experience
of writing that is one of the greatest
human experiences because it Bears
testimony to survival not just suffering
and I think as well many of us know that
this is really not just a war about
October 7th it's not just a war about
Hamas because in that case why are
premature children being killed in
neonatal War WS why are doctors being
killed why are journalists being killed
but why is a poet um Asad was why is a
poet and a translator and a Shakespeare
scholar and a writer being targeted in
his family home along with his siblings
it's it it it defies logic it defies
everything the the pain of his death uh
for many observers is compounded by what
his death signifies in terms of the loss
of art the loss of culture
uh the loss of literature uh of course
as you mentioned scientists have died
journalists have died artists have died
uh major cultural sites have been
destroyed churches mosques when people
lose their art when people lose their
literature people lose their culture
what's at stake everything everything is
at stake you're losing
um it's a patrimony of culture its
Heritage its survival it's it's records
you know when we talk about genocide
it's not just the ab absolute Slaughter
of a population it also means removing
them from records it means removing
testimony it means removing art it means
REM removing poetry removing music um it
means erasing the lives of ordinary
people and I think when we talk about
the destruction that we're seeing in
Gaza it is to reduce Gaza to nothing to
take not just homes but also
libraries uh not just hospitals but also
univers I ities and let there be nothing
let Gaza be not even a memory a place
that once was and never will be again
not even in the pages of books and I
think that is really what is so
horrifying about this violence you know
we know states are threatened by
cultural figures we know that writers
are powerful because they they hold
power to account they keep a record of
violence of Terror of these kind of
nightmares and and that's why they kill
them that's why they've always killed
them art literature writers as you just
mentioned not only hold power to account
they also create space for us to
understand ideas in a different way I'm
thinking about your work uh for example
your novel The Runaways allows us to
understand through the lens of three
young men who uh become effectively
radicalized in Iraq through that lens
we're able to understand how complicated
political violence is how complicated
the journey into quote unquote
radicalization um is uh there's no
condoning of hamas's killing of
civilians uh we're not justifying the
ongoing treatment of hostages you once
said something that that stuck with me
you said even as I watched my characters
do terrible things I mourn the fact that
they didn't have other choices how does
that idea uh speak to what's going on
with regard to the plight of
Palestinians at this moment well you
know we're talking today Mark um partly
to discuss
rater's um life and and his work and a
lot of us came to know him through an
interview he did um where he spoke
against the backdrop of Israeli air
strikes which are thundering behind him
and all around him and he speaks through
tears and he asks what the world wants
Palestinians to do to to give up to
drown to commit Mass suicide and he said
very movingly in that interview he said
you know I'm I'm an academic I'm I'm a a
professor a poet the the most dangerous
thing I have in my home is is a marker
but if they come for me if they come
into my house I will take that marker
and I will throw it at the soldiers who
have come to kill me I think that at
this point um to keep Gaza as it has
been kept um under a naval blockade a
land
Siege um there is no airport there no
nothing can get in nothing can get out
everything from food to water as we have
seen is
controlled
um you are not allowed to move freely
you are not allowed to speak freely you
are not allowed to engage freely I don't
quite understand what the world wants um
that's in no way to justify
violence um but when you push people
against the wall when you don't offer
them a solution for their future then
they will take any any option that is
open to them and that's not just in the
case of Palestine that's in the case of
Ukraine that's in the case of any people
anywhere in the world and and it has
been disturbing to see Ukrainian
resistance um valorized and celebrated
in the west um as Noble and profound and
then the same kind of resistance um when
it happens uh to be practiced by Brown
people uh demonized um when the media
picked up um footage of Tamimi a young
Palestinian woman standing up to an
Israeli occupation Soldier they
misunderstood her because she is a
blonde and you know fair skinned to be
Ukrainian and when the media at large
thought a tamim a Palestinian girl was a
Ukrainian they were almost en raptured
by her bravery the moment they found out
she was Palestinian that conversation
was shut down either we don't condone
violence either we don't accept and
valorize violence or we do and I've only
ever seen it celebrated and accepted um
when it's white people doing it another
thing we've seen come out in the open
since October 7th is a kind of
hypervisibility of women uh over the
past three three months for example
there's been an emphasis on the
visibility of women Israeli women uh at
war with Gaza there was a headline in
The Times of Israel that read Squad of
female IDF combat troops eliminated
nearly 100 Hamas terrorists uh while an
article from the Australian financial
review reported uh that quote Israel
Israeli female only tank Crews made
history on October 7th by fighting Hamas
emphasizing that the quote slightly
built soldiers showed no squeamishness
at killing this isn't exactly the
feminist fantasy that many people
envisioned um it's absolutely not and I
I I really think it's it's beyond
deranged um to present hypersexualized
female soldiers as some kind of feminism
it's not it's it's crass it's vulgar and
it's incredibly ugly for the message
that it portrays you can't claim
feminism when you're killing uh
Palestinian mothers you can't claim
feminism when your rifle is being aimed
at a hospital you can't claim feminism
um when there are children 25,000
Palestinian children have been orphaned
that cannot be called the success of
feminism another thing that happens a
lot of times is now we see pink washing
I mean on November 13th I'm going give
you an example uh Israel's official
Twitter account posted a a soldier a
photo of a soldier standing in front of
a demolished Gaza and the soldier was
holding a pride flag with in the name of
Love written in English Arabic and
Hebrew and the post claimed that it was
quote the first ever pride flag raised
in Gaza when you see stuff like that how
do you
respond Mark I I don't think there are
enough words to convey the utter
perversity to hold a pride flag over the
scene of a massacre over the scene of
Slaughter
and then claim some kind of ownership of
Love um I think it is the most obscene
kind of pink washing you know let's also
remember that same-sex marriage is not
legal in Israel um Israelis have to go
to another country to marry their
Partners if they happen to be queer and
then maybe they get that recognized in
Israel but it's not legal in Israel and
so to use um queer language symbolism
and history while they carry out what is
essentially a Carnage it is the the
genocide of civilians to use then uh
Pride flags and claim some kind of
advancement is is is so perverse I I I
just don't think it can be taken
seriously at all and also you know what
do they know about um queer lives in in
Gaza or in the Middle East or in the
Muslim world nothing you know they don't
know anything about our lives they don't
even see us as as human beings and
anyone who has any respect for queer
politics queer Liberation knows that you
cannot tie that to aarth you cannot tie
that to occupation Fatima I want to
think about Justice these kind of big
picture ideas that we talk about you
know what for you does it take to get
there well um
you know I think again as I'm not
Palestinian um I I can't claim to speak
for anyone but you cannot talk about
Justice while an occupation a brutal
occupation is underway and you cannot
possibly talk about justice under the
confines of of a Siege um of under
apartheid I I certainly don't know Mark
how there will be Justice for these
mothers who are giving birth under the
most Terri in conditions that that I can
think of I don't know what Justice we
can give those premature babies who were
left to die uh because their hospitals
were attacked I I don't know what
Justice we can ask for for not just the
journalists who have been murdered for
for telling us about this horror but for
their families who have been targeted
and killed I I I wouldn't I wouldn't
even know where to begin there I
wouldn't even know how to ask I think we
also have to ask forgiveness not just
Justice fatimo I want to thank you uh
for sharing your views with us we
appreciate your
time thank you
Mark